Docs: GUI custom login feature (#30799)
hashicorp/vault: website/content/docs/ui/custom-login.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Manage custom login options
description: >-
  Use custom login flows to control how clients can authenticate to Vault
  through the GUI.
---

# Manage custom login options for the Vault GUI

@include 'alerts/enterprise-and-hcp.mdx'

> Use login customizations to preferred authentication methods and control which methods display in the Vault GUI login form.

Reviewer: "Use login customizations to preferred authentication methods and control which methods display in the Vault GUI login form."

Needs a verb at the beginning, some grammar updates:
"Use login customization to set a preferred authentication methods and control which methods display in the Vault GUI login form."

<Tip>

- To apply a login customization to the `root` namespace, pass an empty string: `namespace=""`.

> 

Reviewer: should this say root or admin (for HVD)?

Author: No, `root` and `admin` are different. Root is effectively the "lack" of a namespace because it's the top-most level. Passing `admin` would be necessary to set for the HVD admin namespace.

- **Login settings are inheritable by default**. Namespaces inherit login settings from their parent 
unless inheritance is explicitly disabled. To scope a login setting to a specific namespace, 
set: `disable_inheritance=true`.

> </Tip>

Author: I wasn't sure if this was the right format or location for this info, but felt it was important to call out somewhere.
<img width="716" alt="Screenshot 2025-06-02 at 10 26 24 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e54a164c-3514-4ee6-99e3-14c6b32ed340" />

## Before you start 

- **You must have Vault Enterprise 1.20.0 or higher installed.**
- **You must have the appropriate permissions**:
  - You must have `update` permission for the `sys/config/ui/login/default-auth` endpoint.

## Step 1: Select your authentication method

Only the following methods are supported by the GUI and can be set as a default or preferred backup method:

> 

Reviewer: Suggest leaving out "preferred" and just say "backup"

@include 'ui/supported-login-methods.mdx'

You can customize your login flow with a default authentication method,
preferred authentication methods, or both.

Configuration           | Result
----------------------- | ------
Default only            | Clients must use the selected authentication method during login

> Preferred only          | Clients must choose among the selected authentication methods during login

Reviewer: "Client must choose among the selected"

Suggest change to
"Client must choose from the selected"

Default and preferred   | Clients see the default method first but can toggle to view the preferred backup methods

> 

Reviewer: "Clients see the default method first but can toggle to view the preferred backup methods"

to 

"Clients see the default method first but can access the preferred methods as backup methods"

because the preferred methods live under the backup link if there's a default set, right?

Author: They are accessible by clicking "Sign in with other methods" 
<img width="644" alt="Screenshot 2025-06-02 at 12 41 50 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/656010b8-236f-40cc-bf8e-dd1a82a33f38" />

## Step 2: Make the authentication method visible to the GUI

Set the listing visibility of your authentication plugin to `unauth` so Vault
knows to make it available in the GUI login flow. 

<Note title="Listing visibility">

If [listing visibility](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#listing_visibility-1) is unset or set to `hidden`, 
the Vault GUI assumes the default mount path for login, which matches the method type.

> 

Reviewer: Could you explain more about what exactly this means? Is there another doc to link to that goes into more detail? This is a complicated nuance

Author: There are [docs linked](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/api-docs/system/auth#listing_visibility-1) already (that's what the markdown syntax of `[link text](href)` means).

</Tab>
<Tab heading="API" group="api">

Make a `DELETE` call to the
[`sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/{rule_name}`](/vault/api-docs/system/config-ui-login-default-auth)
endpoint to delete a login setting for a namespace. 

```shell-session
$ curl                                             \
  --request DELETE                                 \
  --header "X-Vault-Token: ${VAULT_TOKEN}"         \
  http://127.0.0.1:8200/v1/sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/<unique_rule_name>| jq
```

For example, to delete the rule "dev-gui-login":

<CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

```shell-session
$ curl                                               \
    --request DELETE                                 \
    --header "X-Vault-Token: ${VAULT_TOKEN}"         \
    ${VAULT_ADDR}/v1/sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/dev-gui-login | jq
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>
</Tabs>

# Using a Direct Link

The `?with=` query parameter can be used at any point to override login customizations. For example,
if a Vault GUI user is unable to authenticate with the default or backup method(s) they can bypass
the login settings using a direct URL for their method of choice. 

> 

Reviewer: Can you enumerate what all the auth methods "with" params would be?

Author: No because it references mount paths which could be any number of value. For backward compatibility we do also support `with=<type>` but that's not really something we want to encourage and is more so that existing bookmarks will still work. 

So I think I'll reword this section to specify that it should be used just with visible mount paths and maybe include a note about backward compatibility for existing bookmarks or something.

   with the JSON data:

    ```shell-session
    $ curl                                             \
      --request POST                                   \
      --header "X-Vault-Token: ${VAULT_TOKEN}"         \
      --header "X-Vault-Namespace: ${VAULT_NAMESPACE}" \
      --data @data.json                                \
      ${VAULT_ADDR}/v1/sys/auth/<plugin_mount_path>/tune
    ```

    For example:

    <CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

    ```shell-session
    $ curl                                               \
        --request POST                                   \
        --header "X-Vault-Token: ${VAULT_TOKEN}"         \
        --header "X-Vault-Namespace: ${VAULT_NAMESPACE}" \
        --data @data.json                         \
        ${VAULT_ADDR}/v1/sys/auth/gui/userpass/tune | jq
    ```

    </CodeBlockConfig>

    `/sys/auth/{plugin_mount_path}/tune` does not return data on success.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Step 3: Set your default and preferred authentication methods

The following authentication method types are supported:

@include 'ui/supported-login-methods-api-docs.mdx'

> <Tip>

Author: I wasn't really sure where to put this `<Tip>`
<img width="724" alt="Screenshot 2025-06-02 at 2 04 23 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/30e7a9f0-01ab-45ab-aa42-b196abfedd90" />

> <Tip>

Author: Does this tip make sense here? I wasn't really sure where to put it 🤔

Use login customization to set preferred authentication methods and control which methods display in the Vault GUI login form.

## Before you start 

@include 'alerts/restricted-admin.mdx'

- **You must have Vault Enterprise 1.20.0 or higher installed.**
- **You must have the appropriate permissions**:
  - You must have `update` permission for the [`sys/config/ui/login/default-auth`](/vault/api-docs/system/config-ui-login-default-auth) endpoint.
 
## Step 1: Select your authentication method

Only the following methods are supported by the GUI and can be set as a default or backup method:

@include 'ui/supported-login-methods.mdx'

You can customize your login flow with a default authentication method,
preferred authentication methods, or both.

Configuration           | Result
----------------------- | ------
Default only            | Clients must use the selected authentication method during login.
Preferred only          | Client must choose from the selected authentication methods during login.
Default and preferred   | Clients see the default method first but can access the preferred methods as backup methods.

## Step 2: Make the authentication method visible to the GUI

> Set the listing visibility of your authentication plugin to `unauth` so Vault
> knows to make it available in the GUI login flow. 

Author: I think this could probably be reworded to the following to make it clearer. 
```suggestion
Set the listing visibility of your authentication plugin to `unauth` so the Vault GUI can build the correct URL for authenticating the user.
```

---
layout: docs
page_title: Manage custom login options
description: >-
  Use custom login flows to control how clients can authenticate to Vault
  through the GUI.
---

# Manage custom login options for the Vault GUI

@include 'alerts/enterprise-and-hcp.mdx'

Use login customization to set preferred authentication methods and control which methods display in the Vault GUI login form.

## Before you start 

@include 'alerts/restricted-admin.mdx'

- **You must have Vault Enterprise 1.20.0 or higher installed.**
- **You must have the appropriate permissions**:
  - You must have `update` permission for the [`sys/config/ui/login/default-auth`](/vault/api-docs/system/config-ui-login-default-auth) endpoint.
 
## Step 1: Select your authentication method

Only the following methods are supported by the GUI and can be set as a default or backup method:

@include 'ui/supported-login-methods.mdx'

You can customize your login flow with a default authentication method,
backup authentication methods, or both.

Configuration           | Result
----------------------- | ------

> Default only            | User only see the selected authentication method during login.
> Backup(s) only          | User only sees from the selected authentication method(s) during login.
> Default and backup(s)   | User see the default method first but can access the backup methods as alternate options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Default only            | Users see only the selected authentication method during login.
Backup(s) only          | Users see only from the selected authentication method(s) during login.
Default and backup(s)   | Users see the default method first but can access the backup methods as alternate options.
```

## Step 2: Make the authentication method visible to the GUI. (Optional, but recommended) 

> Set the [listing visibility](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#listing_visibility-1) of your authentication plugin to `unauth` 
> so the Vault GUI knows which login URL to authenticate against.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set the [listing visibility](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#listing_visibility-1) of your authentication plugin to `unauth` 
so the Vault GUI knows which login URL to use for authentication.
```

<Warning title="Listing visibility and plugin mount paths">

Login customizations specify authentication **types**, not specific plugin paths.
As a result, the Vault GUI assumes each login method is mounted at its default mount [path](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#path), 

> which corresponds to its auth type.

Author: Really struggling with wording here - this is a pretty important piece of information to get across

> Login customizations specify authentication **types**, not specific plugin paths.
> As a result, the Vault GUI assumes each login method is mounted at its default mount [path](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#path), 
> which corresponds to its auth type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Login customizations specify authentication **types**, not specific plugin paths.
As a result, the Vault GUI assumes each login method is mounted at its default [path](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#path), 
which corresponds to its auth type.
```

If a login customization specifies a type for a plugin mounted at a **non-default** path, 
that mount **must** be configured with `listing_visibility=unauth`.

Otherwise, users will be unable to authenticate through the customized login view.

</Warning>

<Tip title="Make use of metadata">

Set the [mount description field](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#description) to

> make it obvious that the mount is a default or backup login method(s) for the
> Vault GUI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
clearly indicate that the mount is a default or backup login method for the
Vault GUI.
```

      disable_inheritance=false                                   \
      namespace_path=dev
    ```

    </CodeBlockConfig>

1. Use `vault read` with the
   [`sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/{rule_name}`](/vault/api-docs/system/config-ui-login-default-auth)
   endpoint and the new rule name to verify the login configuration. 
   
   For example:

    <CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

    ```shell-session
    $ vault read sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/dev-gui-login

    Key                    Value
    ---                    -----
    backup_auth_types      [ldap token]
    default_auth_type      userpass
    disable_inheritance    false
    namespace_path         dev/
    ```

    </CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>
<Tab heading="GUI" group="gui">

<Note>
Login settings can only be viewed or deleted using the Vault GUI. 
Creating login customizations is only available using the CLI or API to encourage best practices.
</Note>

- Navigate to the **Settings** section in the Vault GUI sidebar and select **UI Login Settings**.
- View list of existing login settings.
- Click on a customization to view more details.

</Tab>
<Tab heading="API" group="api">

> 1. Create a JSON file with a new custom login configuration rule that sets your
>    default and/or backup GUI authentication methods:

Reviewer 2: I realize `set` is how developers will think about this, but for readability I think `specifies` is the better word.
```suggestion
1. Create a JSON file with a new custom login configuration rule that specifies your
   default and/or backup GUI authentication methods:
```

Reviewer 2: Of course we use set a lot throughout, so I could be persuaded either way.

    ```json
    {
      "data": {
        "backup_auth_types": [
          "ldap",
          "token"
        ],
        "default_auth_type": "userpass",
        "disable_inheritance": false,
        "namespace_path": "dev/"
      },
    }
    ```

    </CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Delete a login rule

<Tabs>
<Tab heading="CLI" group="cli">

Use `vault delete` with the 
[`sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/{rule_name}`](/vault/api-docs/system/config-ui-login-default-auth)
endpoint and rule name to delete a login setting for a namespace. 

```shell-session
$ vault delete sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/<unique_rule_name>
```

For example:

<CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

```shell-session
$ vault delete sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/dev-gui-login
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>
<Tab heading="GUI" group="gui">

You can delete a login rule in two places from the **UI Login Settings** page.

**From the additional options menu for the customization**:

1. Find the login rule you want to delete.
1. Click the additional option button (three dots).
1. Select **Delete** from the dropdown menu to bring up the delete confirmation modal.

**From the customization details page**:

> 1. Find the login rule you want to delete.
> 1. Select it to open the login settings details page.

Reviewer 2: The use of "it" in the second statement had me eyeing this. Whenever possible, especially for instructions, I try to be explicit and instead of using pronouns like "it" which refers to "login rule" I'll just use "login rule" so it's super clear what I'm referring to.
```suggestion
1. Select the login rule to open its login settings details page.
```

1. Click the **Delete Rule** button to bring up the delete confirmation modal.

</Tab>
<Tab heading="API" group="api">

Make a `DELETE` call to the
[`sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/{rule_name}`](/vault/api-docs/system/config-ui-login-default-auth)
endpoint to delete a login setting for a namespace. 

```shell-session
$ curl                                             \
  --request DELETE                                 \
  --header "X-Vault-Token: ${VAULT_TOKEN}"         \
  http://127.0.0.1:8200/v1/sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/<unique_rule_name>| jq
```

For example, to delete the rule "dev-gui-login":

<CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

```shell-session
$ curl                                               \
    --request DELETE                                 \
    --header "X-Vault-Token: ${VAULT_TOKEN}"         \
    ${VAULT_ADDR}/v1/sys/config/ui/login/default-auth/dev-gui-login | jq
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>
</Tabs>

> ## Using a Direct Link

Author: I wasn't really sure if this should live here. One thought was honoring the Next steps pattern and creating a new route/docs for "Vault GUI query params" because I'd also like to document the behavior of using the `wrapped_token` query parameter somewhere

Reviewer 2: I like having it in one view, but I can also see the benefit of breaking it out for more detail. I'll defer to whatever the docs folks suggest.

Author: I think maybe this should be sentenced cased? `Using a direct link`

> The `?with=` query parameter can be used at any point to override login customizations. For example,

Reviewer 2: @deidraprado I'm tagging you because you’ll have the most insight into how users might interpret this. These are the docs for the custom login feature, and this specific part is about how you can override the default or backup method at any time if you don’t have something like “token” set as one. You and I had discussed this concern, so I wanted your take: any feedback on how this is worded, or do you think it’s clear enough for folks to understand?

Author: Sounds good! Most people don't know it's a thing which is why I sprinkled links all over the place 😂 Easy enough to add here, too!

  - To **delete login settings**, you must have `delete` permission for the [`sys/config/ui/login/default-auth`](/vault/api-docs/system/config-ui-login-default-auth) endpoint.

## Step 1: Select your authentication method

Only the following methods are supported by the GUI and can be set as a default or backup method:

@include 'ui/supported-login-methods.mdx'

You can customize your login flow with a single default authentication method, multiple
backup authentication methods, or both.

Configuration           | Result
----------------------- | ------
Default only            | Users see only the selected authentication method during login.
Backup(s) only          | Users see only from the selected authentication method(s) during login.
Default and backup(s)   | Users see the default method first but can access the backup methods as alternate options.

## Step 2: Make the authentication method visible to the GUI. (Optional, but recommended) 

Set the [listing visibility](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#listing_visibility-1) of your authentication plugin to `unauth` 
so the Vault GUI knows which login URL to use for authentication.

> <Warning title="Listing visibility and plugin mount paths">

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Login customizations specify authentication **types**, not specific plugin paths.
As a result, the Vault GUI assumes each login method is mounted at its default [path](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#path), 
which corresponds to its auth type.

> If a login customization specifies a type for a plugin mounted at a **non-default** path, 
> that mount **must** be configured with `listing_visibility=unauth`.
> 
> Otherwise, users will be unable to authenticate through the customized login view.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To configure an authentication plugin mounted on a custom path, you must set
`listing_visibility` to `unauth` in the plugin configuration. Otherwise, Vault
cannot display the authentication option and users cannot use that mount to
authenticate through the customized login view.
```

> </Warning>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Doubling up on asides isn't a good idea. We can just make the visibility information part of the document text

<Tip title="Make use of metadata">

Set the [mount description field](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#description) to

> clearly indicate that the mount is a default or backup login method(s) for the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
clearly indicate that the mount is a default or backup login method for the
```

      -namespace <plugin_namespace>  \
      -description <visibility_note> \
      -listing-visibility "unauth"   \
      <authentication_method>
    ```
    
    For example:
    
    <CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

    ```shell-session
    $ vault auth enable                      \
      -path gui/ldap                         \
      -namespace admin                       \
      -description "Default GUI auth method" \
      -listing-visibility "unauth"           \
      ldap
    
    Success! Enabled ldap auth method at: gui/ldap/
    ```

    </CodeBlockConfig>

1. Use `vault auth list` to verify the plugin configuration. 

  For example:
    
  <CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

  ```shell-session
  $ vault auth list -namespace=admin
  
  Path         Type        Accessor                  Description                Version
  ----         ----        --------                  -----------                -------
  gui/ldap/    ldap        auth_ldap_c84b8cd2        Default GUI auth method    n/a
  ```

  </CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>
<Tab heading="GUI" group="gui">

@include 'gui-instructions/enable-authn-plugin.mdx'

- Select the desired plugin.

> - Optional: Enter a unique path for the plugin—the default path is the plugin type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Optional: Enter a unique path for the plugin. By default, Vault uses the
  plugin type as the mount path.
```

- Enable **Use as preferred UI login method** toggle.

> - Optional: Update **Description** to let teams know to use this method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Optional: Update **Description** to help users determine which authentication
  method they should use.
```
Style correction: avoid "this" as a pronoun

      --request POST                                   \
      --header "X-Vault-Token: ${VAULT_TOKEN}"         \
      --header "X-Vault-Namespace: ${VAULT_NAMESPACE}" \
      --data @data.json                         \
      ${VAULT_ADDR}/v1/sys/auth/gui/ldap | jq
  ```

  </CodeBlockConfig>

  `/sys/auth/{plugin_mount_path}` does not return data on success.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

### Option 2: Update an existing plugin

<Tabs>
<Tab heading="CLI" group="cli">

Use `vault auth tune` to update the `-listing-visibility` flag to `unauth`:
    
```shell-session
$ vault auth tune              \
  -namespace <plugin_namespace>  \
  -description <visibility_note> \
  -listing-visibility "unauth"   \
  <mount_path>
```
    
For example:
    
<CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard="true">

```shell-session
$ vault auth tune                        \
  -namespace admin                       \
  -description "Default GUI auth method" \
  -listing-visibility "unauth"           \
  gui/ldap

Success! Tuned the auth method at: gui/ldap/
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>
<Tab heading="GUI" group="gui">

@include 'gui-instructions/update-authn-plugin.mdx'

- Click **Configure >**.

> - Enable **Use as preferred UI login method** toggle.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Enable the **Use as preferred UI login method** toggle.
```

> - Optional: Update **Description** to let teams know to use this method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Optional: Update **Description** to help users determine which authentication
  method they should use.
```
Style correction: avoid "this" as a pronoun

      "listing_visibility": "unauth"
    }
    ```

1. Make a `POST` call to
   [`/sys/auth/{plugin_mount_path}/tune`](/vault/api-docs/system/auth#tune-auth-method)
   with the JSON data:

    ```shell-session
    $ curl                                             \
      --request POST                                   \
      --header "X-Vault-Token: ${VAULT_TOKEN}"         \
      --header "X-Vault-Namespace: ${VAULT_NAMESPACE}" \
      --data @data.json                                \
      ${VAULT_ADDR}/v1/sys/auth/<plugin_mount_path>/tune
    ```

    For example:

    <CodeBlockConfig hideClipboard>

    ```shell-session
    $ curl                                               \
        --request POST                                   \
        --header "X-Vault-Token: ${VAULT_TOKEN}"         \
        --header "X-Vault-Namespace: ${VAULT_NAMESPACE}" \
        --data @data.json                         \
        ${VAULT_ADDR}/v1/sys/auth/gui/userpass/tune | jq
    ```

    </CodeBlockConfig>

    `/sys/auth/{plugin_mount_path}/tune` does not return data on success.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Step 3: Set your default and backup authentication methods

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

By default, namespaces inherit login settings from their parent unless you
explicitly disable inheritance. To scope a login setting to a specific
namespace, set: `disable_inheritance=true`.
```

The following authentication method types are supported:

@include 'ui/supported-login-methods-api-docs.mdx'

<Tip>

> - To apply a login customization to the `root` namespace, pass an empty string: `namespace_path=""`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To apply a login customization to the `root` namespace, pass an empty string
for the namespace path. For example, `namespace_path=""`.
```

> - **Login settings are inheritable by default**. Namespaces inherit login settings from their parent 
> unless inheritance is explicitly disabled. To scope a login setting to a specific namespace, 
> set: `disable_inheritance=true`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
The part about setting scope to the root namespace is a legit tip. The part about inheritability is just basic info that should be part of the main document. In general, tips should be things that folks could skip if they want to.
